come one come all I just baked a fresh
pizza look at that gooey melty cheese
your mouth is already watering I see hey
don't be afraid try it while you're
enjoying that slice we'll take a quick
journey with it to see how taste works
your mouth isn't alone in this project
it also needs the nose specifically your
sense of smell to taste all the food you
eat together
the combo consists of 80% smell and only
20% of taste itself meanwhile the
journey doesn't start in the mouth so
let's rewind it all starts when you just
walk into a room with food every time
you breathe in you inhale everything in
the air and in our case it includes
small particles of pizza floating in the
air yes there are millions of
microscopic pizzas flying around well
sorta but have you ever noticed how hot
food smells more that's because hot
temperatures make those small particles
of food travel longer and faster so more
of them can reach your nose you might
not even be in the same room and that
scent will reach you and carry you into
the kitchen straight to the source
now as you move the pizza slice up to
your face even more particles fly up
your nose but stop right there most of
them won't get past the first barrier
grab a mirror tilt your head back and
you'll see that obstacle it's your nose
hairs you might think they're gross but
those hairs also keep bad things
floating in the air from getting into
your body like dust
whoo this is a thick jungle watch your
step
it's wet here don't worry it's supposed
to be finally we made it through and hit
the jackpot see that patch right there
that looks about the size of a postage
stamp that's where your olfactory
receptors are it's home to around 6
million cells that help you incredible
human detect more than a trillion
different smells if you think that's a
lot maybe next time we'll journey into a
dog's nose they have 40 times more of
those cells now those teeny pizza
particles you just breathe in are
dissolving in the nose mucus hence why
it needs to be wet in here have you ever
noticed how airplane food tastes weird
well it's not the food it's you the air
in the cabin is drier than the Sahara
Desert that low humidity air dries out
the mucus making our sense of smell
almost non-existent and remember without
smell you don't get much taste the
microscopic pizza particles have
dissolved and this creates a chemical
reaction it triggers the many olfactory
receptors that can detect what each
chemical reaction means this information
travels up a route like system of nerves
and into something called the olfactory
bulb Congrats we're now in the brain
yeah it was right on the other side of
this wall the whole time the information
about that special chemical reaction is
passed on to other parts of the brain
for identification
one part is sent to the limbic system it
has to do with consciousness so you're
not saying mmm pizza just yet this part
of the brain just identifies the smell
and sends the information to the other
organs like your liver and stomach says
get ready guys pizzas coming that smell
information might also trigger the part
of the brain that influences emotions
and memories that explains why we have
such a strong connection between smells
and certain moments in our life like how
the smell of freshly cut grass takes you
back to summer spent mowing grandma's
lawn
actually I hated mowing the grass anyway
it's time to head to the part of the
brain where consciousness kicks in
now the thought comes to your mind I
smell pizza all of that happened in a
fraction of a second by the way your
mouth starts watering before you even
try it
it's those microscopic pizzas doing
their work in your nose
the smell senses send the information to
your mouth as well so when you finally
take that first bite your mouth is
already prepared and ready to enjoy
every second of it plus your mouth is
where digestion starts your saliva
starts breaking down the pizza getting
it prepped for the stomach but back to
taste with a mouth full of cheesy
goodness the saliva picks up those small
pizza particles and helps it move all
around your mouth reaching and
triggering the taste buds in there oh
yeah they're not only on your tongue
they're all over your mouth that being
said you still have that mirror from
earlier open up wide and stick out your
tongue those little bumps on it aren't
your taste buds those are called papilla
some but not all contain several taste
buds further down within their walls in
other words you can't see your taste
buds one taste but contains from 50 to
100 taste cells they can pick up salty
sweet sour bitter and umami or savory
tastes now what if the piece of slice
you've bitten into was too hot and burnt
the tip of your tongue does it mean
you'll never be able to taste sweet
things again oh no
well I'm referring to that tongue map
thing the diagram showing the tip of
your tongue taste sweet stuff the rim
picks up salty the sides taste sour the
back detects bitter and savory receptors
are all over well it's not true all the
taste buds on your tongue have receptors
that can pick up these different tastes
certain types aren't isolated to certain
parts of the tongue also lucky for those
of us who just can't wait for our food
to cool down taste buds regenerate every
one to two weeks so even after you've
burnt your tongue really bad you'll
start regaining the sensitivity after
just a few days now just like in your
nose those small pizza particles create
a chemical reaction in your
of each chemical reaction triggers one
of the taste cells and taste but the
stimulated taste cell sends this
information on to the nerve cells the
nerve cells try to make sense of this
data compile a report and send it to the
brain just like smell the information
goes to two parts of the brain one part
understand what the taste is and sends
that information to the stomach and
liver this way all the organs are
prepared for the incoming food and the
conscious part of the brain creates a
thought whoa this pizza is amazing or
this pizza is pineapples but all this
works only together with the sense of
smell smell is 10,000 times more
sensitive than any of your other senses
mostly because it's directly connected
to the brain and doesn't need to travel
through the body that can also explain
why food tastes so bland when you have a
cold a stuffy nose doesn't let you smell
the food cutting away 80% of the taste
and that's why we spent a majority on
this trip in your sniffer so who's up
for another slice of pizza or five yeah